USF-894: Add payment method (Braintree) (#121)
commerce-docs/microsite-commerce-storefront: src/content/docs/dropins/checkout/tutorials/add-payment-method.mdx

---
title: Add a payment method
description: Learn how to integrate third-party payment providers with the Commerce boilerplate template.
---

import Aside from '@components/Aside.astro';
import FileTree from '@components/FileTree.astro';
import { Tabs, TabItem, Code, Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import Tasks from '@components/Tasks.astro';
import Task from '@components/Task.astro';

To integrate third-party payment providers, you can use the extensibility features provided by the checkout drop-in component. This component allows you to customize the list of payment methods shown during the checkout process using slots.

## Steps-by-step

This tutorial provides a step-by-step guide for integrating the Braintree payment provider with the Commerce boilerplate template. You can use these steps as a reference to integrate other payment providers as well.

<Aside type="note">

> Make sure that the payment provider you choose offers an SDK or API that you can use to integrate with the [slots](/dropins/checkout/slots/) provided by the `PaymentMethods` container in the checkout drop-in component.

Author: @tkacheva, is there anything else that we can/should explain about using payment providers other than Braintree?

Author: @keoko & @mcocapiza,

If a customer chooses a different payment provider, I assume it must be a provider that 1) Adobe Commerce supports and 2) provides an extension that must be installed/configured on the Adobe Commerce backend (unless already bundled with core Commerce like Braintree).

Can you please confirm if that's true so we can clarify in the public docs?

Reviewer: Who is "a customer" in this context? Do you mean a shopper or a merchant?

And yes, would have to be supported by Adobe Commerce. And most likely all of these come with some extension that is required on the backend.

Author: Thanks @sirugh. I mean "merchant".

</Aside>

<Tasks>

<Task>
### Prerequisites

You must [configure](https://experienceleague.adobe.com/en/docs/commerce-admin/stores-sales/payments/braintree) the Braintree extension on your Adobe Commerce backend before integrating it with the Commerce boilerplate template.

</Task>

<Task>

### Add the Braintree client SDK

To integrate the Braintree payment provider with the Commerce boilerplate template, you must add the Braintree client SDK to the `commerce-checkout.js` file.

<Steps>
1. Open the `blocks/commerce-checkout/commerce-checkout.js` file.

1. Import the Braintree client SDK.
   
   ```js
   ...
   import 'https://js.braintreegateway.com/web/dropin/1.43.0/js/dropin.js';
   ...
   ```

</Steps>

</Task>

<Task>

### Define a payment method modifier

To render the Braintree payment method UI in the `PaymentMethods` container, you must define a modifier that you can use in the container's `main` slot.

```js
const renderBraintreePayments = (element, context) => {

>   const { onPlaceOrder } = context;

Author: @mcocapiza, I think that there was also some confusion about how `onPlaceOrder` is being used here. Is it so that the `renderBraintreePayments` function can use it as a parameter to handle order placing logic?

---
title: Add a payment method
description: Learn how to integrate third-party payment providers with the Commerce boilerplate template.
---

import Aside from '@components/Aside.astro';
import FileTree from '@components/FileTree.astro';
import { Tabs, TabItem, Code, Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import Tasks from '@components/Tasks.astro';
import Task from '@components/Task.astro';

The [Commerce boilerplate template](https://github.com/hlxsites/aem-boilerplate-commerce) supports a variety of third-party payment providers, enabling you to integrate the payment gateway of your choice.

## Steps-by-step

> This tutorial provides a step-by-step guide for integrating the Adyen payment provider with the Commerce boilerplate template using a custom NPM package developed by Adobe. You can use these steps as a reference to integrate other payment providers as well.

Author: @sirugh, is there more specific info we can provide about how to use this as an implementation pattern for other payment providers?

Reviewer: Generally the pattern should be:

1. payment provider offers SDK or APIs
2. integrator writes integration code (the code that "connects" the payment provider sdk to the checkout dropin slot)

Whether payment providers offer step 2 for us, or whether we write it ourselves (ie the adyen provider or the stripe example) is yet to be seen.

So what do you need more specifics on? IMO we should be writing documentation focused on step 2, HOW you integrate a "general" provider/api/sdk call into payment providers slot

Author: @sirugh, step 2 sounds like what we should focus on.

<Tasks>

<Task>
### Prerequisites

You must [install and configure](https://docs.adyen.com/plugins/adobe-commerce/set-up-the-plugin-in-adobe-commerce) the Adyen Payment Plugin on your Adobe Commerce backend before integrating it with the Commerce boilerplate template.

<Aside type="note" title="Compatibility">
The Adyen package is not compatible with [API Mesh](https://developer.adobe.com/graphql-mesh-gateway/).
</Aside>

</Task>

<Task>

### Add your client key

> After you install and configure the Adyen Payment Plugin on your Adobe Commerce backend, you need to add your Adyen client key to the Commerce boilerplate configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After you install and configure the Adyen Payment Plugin on Adobe Commerce, you must add your Adyen client key to the Commerce boilerplate configuration.
```

<Steps>
1. Open your project's `configs-stage` or `configs-dev` Google Sheet or Microsoft Excel file.

1. Add a new key-value pair for your Adyen API key.

   | key               | value           |
   |-------------------|-----------------|
   | adyen-client-key  | YOUR_CLIENT_KEY |

1. Save the file.
1. Publish file changes with the [Sidekick](/get-started/#sidekick) extension.
   
</Steps>

</Task>

<Task>

### Install the package

<Steps>
1. Open a terminal and navigate to your boilerplate-based project.
1. Install the Adyen NPM package and add it to the list of project dependencies in your `package.json` file with the `--save` flag.
   
   ```bash
   npm install @dropins/adyen-checkout-extension --save
   ```
</Steps>

</Task>

<Task>

### Integrate with the boilerplate

To integrate third-party payment providers, like Adyen, with Adobe Commerce, you can use the extensibility features provided by the checkout drop-in component. The checkout component allows you to customize the list of payment methods shown during the checkout process using slots.

<Steps>
1. Open the `blocks/commerce-checkout/commerce-checkout.js` file.

1. Import the required files.
   
   ```js
   ...

>    // Adyen drop-in modules

Author: @sirugh, I thought I might be able to show the full code example and use some highlighting and callouts to describe the additions to the default `commerce-checkout.js` block file, but the file in the develop branch in the boilerplate repo has way too many lines. Do you have any suggestions for either using a smaller version of the default block file or providing more specific guidance about where the code additions described in these steps should go?

Reviewer: The stripe example is probably the simplest example of how integration happens. The main point is just the payment slot. The rest is implementation details.

Reviewer: https://github.com/hlxsites/boilerplate-commerce-dropins/pull/89/files#diff-abb36271baf859ae194f7cd3ef71819fe3772b798408056539d919f59fe42e8b

I based this integration on stripe's documentation and what I knew of the payment slot. It was not completed, note the TODOs.

But you can reference it to see a few things, such as how I use Stripe's SDK to create the elements, then inject them into the checkout using the payment slot's "addPaymentMethodHandler" function.

Within that function block I do some things like attach an "onPlaceOrder" handler which sets the method on the cart, and then actually places the order.

Still you can see there is some things like how I cannot call "completeCheckout", at least not back when I wrote this PR.

I think if Olena wants this documented, she needs to get engineering to dedicate some resources to "stabilizing"/refining either stripe or Adyen, otherwise we're going to be documenting POCs.

   import * as adyenApi from '@dropins/adyen-checkout-extension/api.js';
   import { render as AdyenProvider } from '@dropins/adyen-checkout-extension/render.js';
   import AdyenPaymentMethod from '@dropins/adyen-checkout-extension/containers/AdyenPaymentMethod.js';
   ...
   ```

1. Register the Adyen API.

   ```js
   ...
   initializers.register(adyenApi.initialize, {});
   ...
   ```

> 1. Use the `PaymentMethod` [handlers slot](/dropins/checkout/slots/) to add a payment method handler for Adyen. This handler will render the Adyen payment method UI when the backend indicates that Adyen credit card is an allowed payment method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Use the `PaymentMethod` [handlers slot](/dropins/checkout/slots/) to add a payment method handler for Adyen. This handler renders the Adyen payment method UI when the backend indicates that Adyen credit card is an allowed payment method.
```

   ```js
   ...

>    context.addPaymentMethodHandler('adyen_cc', {

Reviewer: It looks like `context.addPaymentMethodHandler` is replaced with something like:

```
render(PaymentMethodsContainer, {
  slots: {
    Handler: {
      adyen_cc: { render: .... }
```

Where the first argument to this function is now the object key and the second argument is the old object that has a `render` prop.

      render: (ctx, element) => {
         AdyenProvider(AdyenPaymentMethod, ctx, element);
         if (element) {
            // Clear the lement first
            element.innerHTML = '';
            // Render the Adyen component
            adyenProvider.render(AdyenPaymentMethod, ctx)(element);
         }
      },
   })
   ...
   ```
</Steps>

</Task>

<Task>

### Verify the integration

<Steps>
1. Start the development server to view the boilerplate storefront.

   ```bash
   npm start
   ```

1. Navigate to a checkout page and verify that the Adyen payment method is displayed as an option.

>    [screenshot]

Author: @sirugh, can you send me a screenshot of the Adyen payment option rendered on the storefront or send me a link to an instance where this might be enabled so I can take it myself?

Reviewer: Sadly I do not have this, we don't include it anymore OOTb. @keoko do the Thunderbolts have one available?

<Tasks>

<Task>
### Prerequisites

You must [configure](https://experienceleague.adobe.com/en/docs/commerce-admin/stores-sales/payments/braintree) the Braintree extension on your Adobe Commerce backend before integrating it with the Commerce boilerplate template.
</Task>

<Task>
### Add the Braintree client SDK

To integrate the Braintree payment provider with the Commerce boilerplate template, you must add the Braintree client SDK to your project.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem label="HTML element" icon="seti:html">

  Use the following `script` tag to add the Braintree client SDK to an HTML file.

  ```html
  <script src="https://js.braintreegateway.com/web/dropin/1.43.0/js/dropin.js"></script>
  ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Import declaration" icon="seti:javascript">

  Use the following `import` declaration to add the Braintree client SDK directly to the `commerce-checkout.js` block file.

  ```js
  import 'https://js.braintreegateway.com/web/dropin/1.43.0/js/dropin.js';
  ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>
</Task>

<Task>
### Define a custom handler

<Steps>
1. Create a `braintreeInstance` variable to manage the Braintree drop-in instance.

   ```js
   let braintreeInstance;
   ```

> 1. Update the [`PaymentMethods`](/dropins/checkout/containers/payment-methods/) container to include a custom handler for the Braintree payment method and set `setOnChange` to `false` to prevent automatic calls to the [`setPaymentMethod`](/dropins/checkout/functions/#setpaymentmethod) function on change.

Author: Should we update the example in the [public slots documentation](https://experienceleague.adobe.com/developer/commerce/storefront/dropins/checkout/slots/) to include Braintree?

---
title: Add a payment method
description: Learn how to integrate third-party payment providers with the Commerce boilerplate template.
---

import Aside from '@components/Aside.astro';
import FileTree from '@components/FileTree.astro';
import { Tabs, TabItem, Code, Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import Tasks from '@components/Tasks.astro';
import Task from '@components/Task.astro';

To integrate third-party payment providers, you can use the extensibility features provided by the checkout drop-in component. This component allows you to customize the list of payment methods shown during the checkout process using slots.

> ## Steps-by-step

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Step-by-step
```

This tutorial provides a step-by-step guide for integrating the Braintree payment provider with the Commerce boilerplate template. You can use these steps as a reference to integrate other payment providers as well.

<Aside type="note">

> Make sure that the payment provider you choose offers an SDK or API that you can use to integrate with the [slots](/dropins/checkout/slots/) provided by the `PaymentMethods` container in the checkout drop-in component.

Reviewer 2: Link to the PaymentMethods container?

</Aside>

<Tasks>

<Task>
### Prerequisites

> For this rtutorial, you must configure the Braintree extension on your Adobe Commerce backend before integrating it with the Commerce boilerplate template. The Braintree extension is bundled with Adobe Commerce and can be [configured](https://experienceleague.adobe.com/en/docs/commerce-admin/stores-sales/payments/braintree) in the Admin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this tutorial, you must configure the Braintree extension on your Adobe Commerce backend before integrating it with the Commerce boilerplate template. The Braintree extension is bundled with Adobe Commerce and can be [configured](https://experienceleague.adobe.com/en/docs/commerce-admin/stores-sales/payments/braintree) in the Admin.
```

<Tasks>

<Task>
### Prerequisites

You must [configure](https://experienceleague.adobe.com/en/docs/commerce-admin/stores-sales/payments/braintree) the Braintree extension on your Adobe Commerce backend before integrating it with the Commerce boilerplate template.

</Task>

<Task>

### Add the Braintree client SDK

To integrate the Braintree payment provider with the Commerce boilerplate template, you must add the Braintree client SDK to the `commerce-checkout.js` file.

<Steps>
1. Open the `blocks/commerce-checkout/commerce-checkout.js` file.

1. Import the Braintree client SDK.
   
   ```js
   ...
   import 'https://js.braintreegateway.com/web/dropin/1.43.0/js/dropin.js';
   ...
   ```

</Steps>

</Task>

<Task>

### Define a payment method modifier

> To render the Braintree payment method UI in the `PaymentMethods` container, you must define a modifier that you can use in the container's `main` slot.

Reviewer: What is a `modifier`?

Author: @mcocapiza, this comes from the example code that you provided in https://github.com/commerce-docs/microsite-commerce-storefront/pull/107. Is "modifier" the correct term? If so, can you help define?

Is it better to just call it a function instead?

```js
const renderBraintreePayments = (element, context) => {
  const { onPlaceOrder } = context;
  const $content = document.createElement('div');

  $content.innerHTML = '<div id="dropin-container"></div>';
```

</Task>

<Task>

### Create and insert the Braintree drop-in UI

Inside the function, a new `div` element is created and assigned to `$content`. This `div` contains another `div` with the ID `dropin-container`. If the element parameter is provided, its inner HTML is set to the content of `$content`. Then, the Braintree drop-in UI is created and attached to the `#dropin-container` using the provided authorization token.

```js
  if (element) {
    element.innerHTML = $content.innerHTML;
    braintree.dropin.create({
      authorization: 'sandbox_g42y39zw_348pk9cgf3bgyw2b',
      container: '#dropin-container',
    });
  }
};
```

</Task>

<Task>

### Set the function on the slot

Finally, you must set the `renderBraintreePayments` function on the `main` slot.

```js
CheckoutProvider.render(PaymentMethods, {
  slots: {
    Main: renderBraintreePayments,
  },
})(document.getElementById('payment-methods'));

> ```

Reviewer: I usually appreciate when tutorials show the entire output combined at the end. Will we have this?

Author: That's good feedback. Yes, I think we should add that. I've done something similar in https://github.com/commerce-docs/microsite-commerce-storefront/pull/123, but I'm not sure if we need to show the whole block file in this particular context.
